The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today, presented
by the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is humor and science fiction. Humor is a fairly broad
term. It can include bitter satire. It can be gentle, poking fun at human
nature. It might be slapstick farce or burlesque or perhaps just a witty use of
the language with puns. Many seem to think that humor and science fiction don't
necessarily mix, that perhaps good humorous science fiction is a rarity. But it
isn't really. H.G. Wells used a lot of humor and satire in his work, as in his
short story, The New Accelerator, where he has this potion that people take and
it speeds up their reactions tremendously. And then the escapades of these two
adventurers, when they get out in the courtyard or the common, next to this
man's laboratory, some of the things they do are hilarious. And all through the
history of science fiction, of course, if you want to call it the mainstream of
science fiction, it's very action-oriented. You know, spaceships, ray guns,
aliens, robots. There usually didn't seem to be a lot of room for humor. It was
there. But it didn't surface, I think, in the classic works, the things that
mostly made the movies and the novels. But there are a number of authors who, in
their larger body of work, have written first-class science fiction that is
humorous. And the first book, which was devoted entirely to humor and science
fiction, was edited by Frederick Brown and Mack Reynolds in 1953. It was called
The Science Fiction Carnival. And in their introduction to that work, Brown and
Reynolds brought out the fact that there's a necessity for laughter. You know,
if we can't laugh at ourselves, we're in pretty bad shape. And that science
fiction has unique qualifications to provide that laughter. And the stories in
that volume, I think, were, you know, illustrated the particular qualifications
in science fiction in that area. Even an author like Arthur C. Clarke, who one
usually considers as writing about very serious themes, such as the destiny of
man, or as in 2001, for instance, and very deep works like that, he has written
some very fine humor in science fiction. He said he'd always wanted to write a
tall tale in the science fiction genre, that very few people had done it. And he
wrote a volume of them, published in 1957, called Tales from the White Heart.
One of my favorites from that collection is a story about a movie studio and
their special effects department. And they put together a ray gun for the good
guys. And then the bad guys want a better looking ray gun, so they develop a
better looking ray gun for them. And this goes back and forth and on and on
until finally at the end of the story, they develop such a fantastic special
effects style weapon that it actually works. And that, of course, is the whole
humorous intent behind the story. But the goings on and developing it are just
wildly witty and very funny. And exaggerated. Clarke said in his introduction
that all the tales in that volume were meant to be tall tales, you know,
deliberately impossible. But there is one branch of humor, a particular subgenre
of humor called satire, which has more of a message or more of a purpose to it
than simply entertainment. And probably this type is found more often than other
types of humor in science fiction, the satiric type. And probably one of the
great classics of all satirical science fiction novels is The Space Merchants by
Frederik Pohl and Cyril Kornbluth, published in 1952. This is a story about a
society that's gone mad over advertising and big business. And Pohl and
Kornbluth show this through extrapolating or pushing forward into the future of
what we know now as advertising and showing a world where advertising is totally
predominant in the culture. A big business persuades people to buy things they
don't need. And it just pushes all the concepts behind advertising to their
utmost limits of Kornbluth and Pohl's imaginations. All of these writers have
shown that humor in science fiction is not such a rarity after all. Their work
demonstrates that. But the acknowledged master of humor in the field of science
fiction is L. Sprague de Camp. Now, de Camp has been writing first-class science
fiction for a long time, since 1937. If you think about it, that puts them a
couple years ahead of writers like Isaac Asimov, Robert Heinlein, A.E. Van Vogt,
and Theodore Sturgeon. In fact, along with these writers, de Camp helped to form
what is nostalgically called the golden age of science fiction. Much of de
Camp's early work, too, I think, was written for the influential editor John W.
Campbell. It's kind of amazing to realize, too, that de Camp is still going
strong today, with over 80 books to his credit, both fiction and nonfiction. A
good deal of his writing is in the category of science fiction, although he does
tend, many times to get into the field of pure fantasy. But whatever kind of
work he's writing, it's notable for its humor. And overall, I think his humor is
a clever, gentle kind that pokes fun at mankind, with sort of an affectionate
tolerance behind it. The Science Fiction Radio Show talked with Sprague de Camp
about his work.
First of all, Mr. de Camp, we wonder just a little bit about your origins as a writer back
in the late 1930s, such things as—or the circumstances that caused you to start
writing. Well, in 1937 and 8, I was working in Scranton, Pennsylvania, as
principal of the School of Inventing and Patenting of the International
Correspondent Schools. And I had a friend in New York, an old college roommate
of mine, named John Clark, who was out of a job and looking for one. And in
order to continue to eat, he, who was a more faithful reader of the science
fiction magazine than I was at that time, wrote a couple of stories. And I used
to come in, oh, once, twice a month to New York, and I'd stay at his apartment,
and we'd sit up late and plot a couple of these stories. So I gave him some help
with them. He sent them to F. Orlin Tremaine, then the editor of Astounding, and
to everybody's surprise, he sold them. So I thought, well, if he can do that,
why can't I? So having plenty of spare time in Scranton, I wrote a couple and
sent them in. And to my surprise, they were bought. Well, at that point, I said,
if we, why hasn't somebody told me about this before? It sure beats working. So
I wrote a few more stories and articles, sold some, didn't sell others. And
then, at the end of 19, let me see, the beginning of 1939, I was working at
another job as one of the editors on a trade journal in New York, and I got
fired in an economy purge. So I thought, instead of fooling around with these
piddling editorial jobs, why don't I try freelancing? You see, I figured that if
I spent five hours a week on my own time writing and made a certain amount of
money, if I could spend 50 hours a week at it, I'd make 10 times that much.
Well, of course, there's a fallacy there, because you soon run into a law of
diminishing returns. But nevertheless, I took the plunge and found that in
freelancing, I earned about as much as I had been doing, and I could be my own
boss, work at my own pace, work sitting down, and wear out all my old clothes.
So, except for a couple of temporary jobs and the Second World War, in which I
was in the Naval Reserve, I've been at it ever since. Excellent. Okay. Those
first couple stories you mentioned that were published, to your surprise, was
one of those "Hyperpilosity"? Yes, "Hyperpilosity" and the "The Isolinguals". What kind of
money did you get when you published those? Oh, let me see. I think it was the
center word, which means I got something like $30 or $40, I suppose. Actually,
if you ask me, what was my first published story? That is a question that can
have any one of three answers. If you mean the first one I started writing, it
was the novel, Genus Homo, in collaboration with the late Schuyler Miller. But
that, although we started that back around 1936, it took us over two years to
finish it, and it wasn't published until 1941. If you mean, what was the first
story I completed? It was a rather amateurish little caveman story called "The
Hairless Ones Come", the usual story about the conflict between the Neanderthal
men and the Cro-Magnards who overran Europe at the end of the fourth glaciation.
And that was published in 1939, I believe it was, in a short live magazine of
historical adventure called Golden Fleece. So that was the first one finished.
Then the first one published was, I believe, "The Isolinguals". Okay. You
obviously have a widespread reputation as a writer of humor, and probably the
foremost in the field of science fiction. Well, that's good of you to say so.
Yeah. Do you think of yourself as a humorist? I mean, is that a label that you
want or that you agree with? Let's say that I'm not an exclusive professional
humorist of the type of the late P.G. Woodhouse, for example. But on the other
hand, I do try to liven up most of my fiction with a generous sprinkling of
humor. Of course, remember that although people generally refer to me as a
science fiction writer, the reason is mainly that I made my early reputation in
that field. Actually, fiction is only about half of my output, the rest being
science, history, biography, literary criticism, and so on. And of the fictional
half, aside from five historical novels that I've written, about half is science
fiction in the strict sense and half is fantasy. So only about a quarter of my
output is really science fiction in the strict sense. Yeah. No, I understand
that. Back to humor for just a moment. Many critics and readers and
commentators, whatever, have said that science fiction and humor don't mix well.
A good science fiction humor, a story or novel, is sort of a rarity. What would
be your comment about that? Well, all I can say is that it is true that there
aren't a great many humorous stories in that field. But then, of course, there
aren't a great many humorous stories in any genre of fiction. Some people do it
and some people don't. Now, back before the First World War, the Second World War, pardon me, I'm not
that old quite yet, but before the Second World War, of the active science
fiction writers in the country, there were only two who were considered humorous
science fiction writers. And I was one and Henry Kuttner was the other.
Curiously enough, both Henry and I, in our private lives, were rather serious,
solemn fellows.
Mm-hmm. Okay. For a number of years, I've been a fan of your Harold Shea
stories, the ones you collaborated with Fletcher Pratt on. Yeah. If I understand
right now, the first one of those was The Roaring Trumpet, published around 1940
or so. Yes. Okay, how did that collaboration with Fletcher Pratt start? Fletcher
Pratt was a military and naval historian, among other things, and he ran a naval
war game in his apartment in New York City. Later they moved to a hired hall
when the game got too large, in which people crawled around on the floor pushing
little model boats, the ship warships, models of real ships, which Fletcher
whittled out at his desk while he was waiting for the next sentence to come.
They were made out of balsa wood and wires and pins and things.
And I was also a naval buff, a regular reader of Jane's fighting ships and so
forth, and I could tell you what was the armament of the French terrible class,
five 5.5-inch guns and so on. And so was John Clark. And he got in touch with
Fletcher, being more aggressive, let us say, and less shy than I in such
matters, and went around and called on him and presently was enrolled in the
naval war game. And then he brought me around to meet Fletcher, and I was
enrolled and was a regular war game player. Well, Fletcher was at that time an
established and active writer, and I was a struggling young pro, you might say.
So John said to me, Hey, Fletcher says he would like to see you. He has an idea
for some stories. So I went around to Fletcher's, and he proposed that he and I
collaborate on a series of stories based upon this far-out theory that you can
slip into any universe you want to by manipulating the symbols of symbolic
logic. I had been studying symbolic logic a little with all its cuter symbols
and things. So, okay, we went to it. And that is how the five Harold Shea
stories originated, as well as the other Pratt-de-Camp collaborations. One thing
that sort of interested me about that particular collaboration, it seems to me
that humor is a very, I guess, a personal thing. I've always wondered how that
kind of a writing process worked. For instance, did you write a story and he go
over it? Did you do alternate stories? How was the actual mechanics of that? Our
method of collaboration, that is to say the one that we found that worked the
best for us, was that he and I would get together.
And he would
come up with one and I'd say, no, no, that's not logical for this or that
reason. Or I'd say, well, it seems to me that that's the same storyline that
Kuttner had just last year in such and such a magazine. And so forth and so on.
And finally we get a story more or less beaten into shape. And I'd make notes in
shorthand, which I had taught myself. And I'd take them home and I'd write out a
synopsis of the story and submit that to Fletcher and he would make any
additions or changes that he thought desirable. Then I'd type the rough draft
and give it to him and he would type the final draft. I have found in
collaborations in general that it's usually better for the younger writer of the
pair to do the rough and the older one, the final. The reason being that the
younger writer is apt to have more energy and more facility. But the older one,
having been around longer, has a sharper critical sense at spotting
illogicalities, infelicities of expression and things of that sort and weeding
them out.
None of those stories had anything to do with Campbell, did it? John W. Campbell
as an editor. Those were entirely separate from him, weren't they? Well, John
Campbell published the first three of the Harold Shea novels. Okay, yeah. What I
was getting at was this. Say, for instance, the world of Norse mythology or any
of those that you construct, the consistency of it. You know, Harold Shea, none
of his modern things work. You know, the matches, the guns. In other words,
there's an internal consistency in the world, even though magic works. That's
right. Was that your own idea? Well, that was a common idea. I mean, both
Fletcher and I had long since agreed that right from the start, that in writing
fantasy, you have to be even more careful about internal consistency than you do
in writing a realistic story. Because the reader's credulity is already
stretched like a rubber band, you see. And if you put extra strain on it by
having some obvious contradiction, it's going to snap. At that point, you'll
probably stop reading. Okay, good. Right. Just my observation that a lot of the
science fantasy that was being written back then especially did not have that
kind of consistency. That is quite right. And I consider myself fairly good at
following a train of logic and spotting cases where people commit
inconsistencies of that sort. As for example, one colleague of mine with whom I
have collaborated, on one night he will have a full moon and on the next night
he will have a new moon. Well, you can't do that. You know, because it takes two
weeks to get from one state to the other. Right, yes, I agree entirely.
In the Harold Shea stories, as in most or many of the other novels you've
written, at least in the science fantasy area, my observation is that your humor
comes from the unexpected things that happen when you put, say, a modern man
back into a world of legend or myth. One of the basic elements of humor, in my
estimation, is the element of surprise or incongruity. In other words, a derby
hat on a London businessman is not funny because they all wear them. But a derby
hat on Julius Caesar is, as you see, because it's incongruous. And that is a
very considerable factor in humor. Right, and to make that incongruity, I guess,
obvious or effective, you had to construct, I guess, very realistic or very
accurate kinds of backgrounds. Say, if it happened in the ancient world or a
mythological world, you had to develop a highly realistic context for it. That's
right. Where did your knowledge, your background in ancient history and
mythology and so forth come from? Did you have to research those things heavily?
Actually, I've always been a very heavy reader. I was reading Darwin's Origin of
Species through at the age of seven, you know, and things like that. And I had a
pretty good historical and mythological knowledge. But actually, for the Roaring
Crumpet, Fletcher knew a good deal more about that than I because he was an
enthusiast for the Northern thing, as William Morris called it, and belonged to
a group that got together in Boston and read Icelandic sagas to each other in
the original. Well, therefore, he was way ahead of me in the matter of Norse
mythology. Then the second story was laid in the world of Spenser's Faerie Queene.
And I had never read the Faerie Queene, so I sat down and dutifully plowed right
through it. I never did have quite the enthusiasm for it that Fletcher did. I
found it pretty tedious for long stretches. But nevertheless, he thought highly
of it, and he went through it. And then for the third one, why I knew something
about Ariosto's Orlando Furioso although I'd never read it through, but it
wasn't very difficult to get hold of a set and read them. And that furnished the
material there. Well, then we, after the Second World War, we sent Harold to the
world of the Finnish Kalevala, and that was simply a matter of getting the
Everyman's Library edition and reading through that and taking notes. And we
finally had him end up where he'd wanted to go all along, which is in the
mythological Ireland of Cu Chulainn and Queen Maeve. And I already knew a fair
amount about that, but I read up some more, and so we got the stories. Mm-hmm. I
have another question on that book. Some people have said, I've read this, that
you had a serious theme to that work that one, you know, can one man change the
past for the better? And I'm not sure if that was intended or if that's even a
fair question, but did you have that kind of a theme behind it? I made that, I
took that as my assumption as to whether it's so or not. I don't know. I don't
think anyone else knows either because there's such a large factor of luck in
all these historical developments. You know, if Napoleon had fallen off his
horse and broken his neck early in his career, why, what would have happened?
And history is full of things like that where what looks like is going to be an
amazing career is cut short by some adventitious circumstance. However, my
primary purpose in writing fiction has always been to entertain. And everything
else takes a secondary place. Now, I don't say that a little, a little
preaching, propaganda for causes that I personally admire, like wildlife
conservation, let's say, or my personal opinions and prejudices don't sneak in
now and then. But nevertheless, the main purpose is entertainment. Some people
say, have said that, oh, well, such and such a story by de Camp is a satire,
satirical. Well, I don't consider myself a satirist. In other words, I don't
write for the intention, with the intention of holding up some human institution
or form of action to ridicule in the serious hope of getting people to change
it. But on the other hand, the human scene around me is so full of dramatic and
absurd and comical features that it's only natural to use them and put them in
my stories. You have beautifully anticipated my next question, which was going
to be that I did see a strain of gentle satire in your work and I was going to
ask you to comment, which you have. Well, as I say, you don't... If you really
look around you over a good many years, you see so many funny things that you
don't have to exercise great ingenuity or imagination in order to get an
entertaining story out of it. I'm not sure I'm going to pronounce this right,
but the... Gavagan's Bar, is that how it's... That's correct. Okay, of course,
that was another collaboration with Pratt, the story of tales from Gavagan's
Bar. I was curious about the antecedents for that kind of a frame tale, you
know, with the bar and the recurring characters and so forth. Was that something
you came up with yourself or was there an antecedent for that? It did have an
antecedent and that was the Jorkens story of Lord Dunsany, of which he wrote five
volumes, and they include some very fine little stories indeed. I was familiar
with the stories. I don't remember whether either Fletcher or I was consciously
influenced by their example when we started our Gavagan's Bar series. Fletcher
just said, well, let's write some short stories of this and that sword laid in
the bar, you know, barroom tall tales. And he also would write Dunsany, and I
dare say he had Jorkins at the back of his mind too. Well, by a coincidence, our
friend Arthur C. Clarke over in England was just beginning his Tales of the White
Heart at the same time, which is also a set of barroom tall tales. Neither of us
knew about what the other was doing. Okay, yeah, his, I thought your book
antedated his teaser was before the Tales of the White Heart. I don't know
offhand what the date of publication of Tales of the White Heart was,
but in any case, I do believe it's correct that both Art and Pratt and I were
working on these theories at the same time, that is, at least they overlapped.
after all, we wrote these stories over a period of several years before they
were collected in book form. They appeared in various magazines, including the
old Weird Tales, even. Hmm. Last years. It folded in 1954. Mm-hmm. Is there
anything special or unique about science fiction or science fantasy that makes
it a unique feel for a humorist? I mean, anything that you couldn't do in other
forms of fiction? Well, you can, of course, because of the
fact that you're much less limited as to your settings and your basic
assumptions than you are in realistic fiction. It gives you unlimited
opportunities for working the
essential factors of humor, such as surprise and incongruity.
So I'd say, on the whole, that it's a very good field for humor, but in a way
that certain other fields are not. For example, I have never, I don't get a
laugh out of funny war stories, for example, because to me, war is a pretty
serious business and not a proper subject for levity.
This is David Crews, Daryl Lane, and David Carson. This has been the Science
Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, in conjunction with KOCV-FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.